# Five Freedoms Monument

In the wake of the pandemic, we sought out to memorialize those who have passed due to COVID-19. We attempted to take a look back at history to inform, guide, and inspire our monument design. We asked ourselves, how has the Spanish Flu of 1918, from which an estimated 675,000 Americans died, been preserved in time? Our research quickly revealed that physical tributes to this tragedy are exceedingly scarce — a mere bench in Vermont being the only one in existence in the United States. The world had not faced an epidemic of this magnitude since the Bubonic Plague, and yet, the shared trauma seemed to dissipate from public consciousness. This widespread memory loss is not without consequence and illuminates one of many factors that contributed to our lack of preparation for COVID-19. 

When reimagining Roosevelt Island’s Four Freedoms Park, we channeled the island’s legacy as the host of New York City’s Smallpox Hospital, designed by James Renwick Jr in 1854, which can be seen just as you enter the park. Both residents and visitors of the island can examine the memorial, serving as a reminder of the past in the present.

We chose this location primarily with Roosevelt Island’s history and character in mind, but also due to its proximity to the United Nations. The guiding motivation behind our monument is to preserve the memory of this pandemic such that the world will be more prepared for the next one, in which the UN could play a critical role.

The basis of our design was the graph of COVID-related deaths in the United States. This numerical representation of the collective experience we endured aptly describes the true toll within our nation. These are lives that will not be forgotten, both to remember how many have been lost as well as carry forward the wisdom we have gleaned on how preventable this pandemic could have been. The spiral shape of the graph signifies the perpetual and ever-important nature of history and disease. While the pandemic may appear to be nearly behind us, we must not forget that disease, be it the Spanish Flu or COVID-19, is cyclical.
